The Encyclical of Pope Leo XIV on safeguarding the human person in the time of artificial intelligence

The dignity of the human being as the criterion to orient technical progress

Pope Leo XIV, in presenting to the world and to all the people of God, his first Encyclical Letter, focused on the care for the human person in the time of Artificial Intelligence, said “I invite all members of the Church and of the human family: let us learn to listen to one another, face the present challenges with courage, and cooperate in building a more human and fraternal society. [...] Please take with you a commitment to stay awake and, as ‘artisans of hope’, to keep on building the worksite of our time. May the Spirit of the Risen Lord Jesus sustain our work together.”

In the time of Artificial Intelligence, humanity is faced with a choice. Whether to let itself be guided by technology and progress as the only principles on which to build our civilization, or should it put at the center the

, reducing technical progress to an instrument. To explain this, Pope Leo uses two biblical images, one the construction of the Tower of Babel and the other the reconstruction of Jerusalem.

Choosing the “right” road requires a

(chapter 1), which looks to the Social Doctrine of the Church following the teachings of the Second Vatican Council: listening to, discerning, and interpreting our times in light of the Gospel, in order to be able to return to humanity the revealed truth, while using the terms of the present.

of our time in function of the dignity of the person, the

FOUNDATIONS AND PRINCIPLES OF THE SOCIAL DOCTRINE OF THE CHURCH

come to help us (chapter 2). The foundations regard the human being, the image of the Triune God, and, as such, the bearer of inviolable rights and an intrinsic dignity, without distinctions. The principles are those of the common good, the universal destination of goods, subsidiarity and solidarity, as well as social justice, which, when placed at the cornerstone of social relations, lead to what Paul VI was the first to summarize in the concept of

integral human development

And so we arrive at the fulcrum of the theme, that is,

the relationship between technology, power, and the human person

(chapter 3). While Pope Leo recognizes the value of technological development as an expression of human creativity, he warns of the risk of it becoming the absolute criterion of judgment. Artificial intelligence, lacking experiences, values, and feelings, cannot and should not assume a role of responsibility and supremacy over human intelligence.

SAFEGUARDING HUMANITY IN THE TRANSFORMATION

is therefore necessary (chapter 4). The first area to attend to is that of

: in an era in which everything can be manipulated, it is necessary to preserve a critical education that permits distinguishing what is true from what is false. The second is

: when the dominant criterion becomes efficiency, work risks losing its human and relational value. The third area is that of

: menaced by digital dependence that collects massive amounts of data, the defense of liberty requires just rules, shared responsibility, and education. To preserve the conditions of an authentically human life, capable of truth, dignified work, and true liberty, a choral effort is necessary.

At this point in the Encyclical Letter, Pope Leo recalls that Artificial Intelligence has effects, often dramatic, also on war. The technological innovations are not limited to making means of defense more efficient, but risk automating and impersonalizing choices that involve life and death, which ought to require ethics and moral responsibility. This is

(chapter 5). Faced with a tendency to prioritize the effectiveness of means over moral judgment and military outcomes over the protection of human life, the only prospect of salvation is a civilization founded on

justice, brotherhood, and dialogue

. In the civilization of love, we can all do our part, beginning with the disarming of our words, practicing justice, assuming the perspective of victims, cultivating dialogue, without taking refuge in idealism, but trusting in a healthy realism. All these good practices find their vital force in

The concluding chapter lingers on the

dimension. Throughout history, the mercy of God has put at the center the mystery of the Incarnation. God became human and taught us true humanity, and a preferential attention for the least. It is in this that the

resides, not in technical power, but rather in freedom, love, and grace. In an epoch that generates exclusion, we are called, as brothers and sisters united in “

,” to safeguard links, in particular through solidarity and the care of the weakest.

in the time of Artificial Intelligence is, therefore, a common and shared responsibility. The initial image returns of the opposition between the Tower of Babel and the Holy City: which do we want to contribute to building? If we become “wise architects” and builders faithful to the truth, who safeguard relationships and invest in education, lovers of justice and peace, humanity will not lose its proper

. It is important, therefore, not to remain resigned spectators, but rather

, with the same faith of Mary, who, in her humility, under foreign domination and with a humiliated and divided people, was able to see the invisible and salvific work of God.